+++

title = "Goals for 2013"
date = 2013-01-02 21:04:07

+++

Boy, does time fly. Anyway, happy new year for all of you! Hope you had a blast during New Year's Eve and are now ready to take on 2013. I know I am.

I follow various life-hacking or so called "self improvement" blogs and read on a few of them about the importance of <a href="https://fitzvillafuerte.com/the-importance-of-writing-down-your-goals-on-paper.html">writing down your goals</a> and sharing them with others. That's why I will use this post to list my goals for 2013. I will come back throughout 2013 and update this post when I made any goal related progress.
<h3>Work related goals</h3>
<ul>
	<li>Release and offer support for a total of 5 WordPress plugins with each of them having over 10k downloads by the end of this year (4/5)</li>
	<li>Create a Dutch portfolio website with all my client work</li>
	<li><del>Create a new WordPress theme for this website</del></li>
	<li><del>Release either a premium WordPress plugin OR a premium WordPress theme</del> (Done: <a href="https://www.mc4wp.com">Mailchimp for WordPress</a>)</li>
	<li>Stick to / focus on creating (responsive) WordPress themes when it comes to client work</li>
	<li>Take on more (of the above) client work</li>
	<li><del>Become a JavaScript expert.</del></li>
</ul>
<h3>Educational goals</h3>
<ul>
	<li><del>Finish an internship assignment for a movie production company based in Bangkok</del></li>
	<li>Follow a minor in entrepeneurship<strong>
</strong></li>
</ul>
<h3>Travel goals</h3>
<ul>
	<li>Travel, work, orientate and enjoy life in Asia for at least a few months. (planned)</li>
	<li>Visit at least 1 more country in the second part of 2013</li>
</ul>
<h3>Fitness goals</h3>
<ul>
	<li>Deadlift 2.5x BW. (2.1/2.5)</li>
	<li>Squat 2x BW (1.61 / 2)</li>
	<li>Overhead Press 1x BW (0.67 / 1)</li>
	<li><del>Bench Press 1x BW (1 / 1)</del></li>
	<li><del>12 consecutive body weight pull-ups</del></li>
	<li><del>20 consecutive body weight dips</del></li>
	<li><del>Drink less beer (have less hangovers)</del></li>
</ul>
That is all I can come up with at the moment. All of these goals seem pretty clear to me, are definitely attainable, inspire me and have a deadline. These are not new year resolutions, these are mere items on a to do list.

Did you set your goals for 2013 already? Tell me about them in the comments. Sharing your goals is important, remember?!

<strong>Update 09-11: </strong>Crossed a few goals off my list: I finished my internship in Bangkok, released a premium plugin which my customers seem to LOVE, installed a new theme on this website and completely quit drinking beer. <strong>Not bad! :-)</strong>

&nbsp;
